Move overview (#227)
flatironinstitute/nemos: docs/quickstart.md

hide:
  - navigation
---
## __Overview__

NeMoS is a neural modeling software package designed to model neural spiking activity and other time-series data
 powered by [JAX](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). 

> At its core, NeMoS consists of two primary modules: the __`glm`__ and the __`basis`__ module.

Reviewer: Up to you, but I think it makes sense to end this line in a colon and then make the descriptions of the `glm` and `basis` bullet points.

> The **`glm`** module implements a Generalized Linear Model (GLM) to map features to neural activity, such as 

Reviewer: it's annoying that the `glm` and `basis` here use `**` to make them bold, while above they use `__`. Minor point, but still makes reading the markdown a bit confusing.

spike counts or calcium transients. It supports learning GLM weights, evaluating model performance, and exploring 
model behavior on new inputs.

The **`basis`** module focuses on designing model features (inputs) for the GLM. 
It includes a suite of composable feature constructors that accept time-series data, allowing users to model a wide 
range of observed variables—such as stimuli, head direction, position, or spike counts— as inputs to the GLM.

## __Generalized Linear Model__

NeMoS provides two implementations of the GLM: one for fitting a single neuron, and one for fitting a  neural population simultaneously. 

### __Single Neuron GLM__

> You can define a single neuron GLM by instantiating an `GLM` object from the `nemos.glm` module.

Reviewer: we might not want to write out the module in the text, in case we end up doing a refactor / changing the API later (it can be hard to catch these). (the example is fine because we'll be using doctests to check them)

```python

>>> import nemos as nmo

>>> # Instantiate the single model
>>> model = nmo.glm.GLM()

```

The coefficients can be learned by invoking the `fit` method of `GLM`. The method requires a design 
matrix of shape `(num_samples, num_features)`, and the output neural activity of shape `(num_samples, )`.

```python

>>> import numpy as np
>>> num_samples, num_features = 100, 3

> >>> # Generate a design matrix
> >>> X = np.random.normal(size=(num_samples, num_features))
> >>> # generate some counts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> # Simulate a design matrix
>>> X = np.random.normal(size=(num_samples, num_features))
>>> # simulate some counts
```

to point out that these are simulated?

>>> spike_counts = np.random.poisson(size=num_samples)

> >>> # define fit the model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> # fit the model
```

>>> model = model.fit(X, spike_counts)

```

Once the model is fit, you can retrieve the model parameters as shown below.

```python
>>> # model coefficients shape is (num_features, )
>>> print(f"Model coefficients shape: {model.coef_.shape}")
Model coefficients shape: (3,)

> >>> # model intercept, shape (1,)

Reviewer: should point out that it's `(1,)` here because there's only a single neuron?

>>> print(f"Model intercept shape: {model.intercept_.shape}")
Model intercept shape: (1,)

```

Additionally, you can predict the firing rate and call the compute the model log-likelihood by calling the `predict` and the `score` method respectively.

```python

>>> # predict the rate

> >>> predicted_rate = model.predict(X)
> >>> predicted_rate.shape  # expected shape: (num_samples,)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> predicted_rate = model.predict(X)
>>> # firing rate has shape: (num_samples,)
>>> predicted_rate.shape  
```

(100,)

>>> # compute the log-likelihood of the model
>>> log_likelihood = model.score(X, spike_counts)

```

### __Population GLM__

> You can set up a population GLM by instantiating a `PopulationGLM` object from the `nemos.glm` module.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set up a population GLM by instantiating a `PopulationGLM` object from the `nemos.glm` module.  The API for the `PopulationGLM` is the same as for the single-neuron `GLM`; the only difference you'll notice is that some of the methods' inputs and outputs have an additional dimension for the different neurons.
```

```python

>>> import nemos as nmo
>>> population_model = nmo.glm.PopulationGLM()

```

> As for the single neuron GLM, you can learn the model parameters by invoking the `fit` method; The input of `fit` are the `(num_samples, num_features)` design matrix, and the population activity stored in two-dimensional array of shape `(num samples, num neurons)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As for the single neuron GLM, you can learn the model parameters by invoking the `fit` method: the input of `fit` are the design matrix (with shape `(num_samples, num_features)` ), and the population activity (with shape `(num_samples, num_neurons)`).
```

Once the model is fit, you can use `predict` and `score` to predict the firing rate and the log-likelihood.

```python

>>> import numpy as np
>>> num_samples, num_features, num_neurons = 100, 3, 5

>>> # Generate a design matrix
>>> X = np.random.normal(size=(num_samples, num_features))
>>> # generate some counts
>>> spike_counts = np.random.poisson(size=(num_samples, num_neurons))

>>> # define fit the model
>>> population_model = population_model.fit(X, spike_counts)

>>> # predict the rate of each neuron in the population
>>> predicted_rate = population_model.predict(X)
>>> predicted_rate.shape  # expected shape: (num_samples, num_neurons)
(100, 5)

>>> # compute the log-likelihood of the model
>>> log_likelihood = population_model.score(X, spike_counts)

```

The learned coefficient and intercept will have shape `(num_features, num_neurons)` and `(num_neurons, )` respectively.

```python

> >>> # model coefficients shape is (num_features, )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> # model coefficients shape is (num_features, num_neurons)
```

>>> print(f"Model coefficients shape: {population_model.coef_.shape}")
Model coefficients shape: (3, 5)

> >>> # model intercept, shape (1,)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> # model intercept, shape (num_neurons,)
```

   allowing it to capture complex, non-linear relationships between inputs and neuronal firing rates. 
   Importantly, this transformation preserves the properties that makes GLM easy to fit and guarantee a 
   single optimal solution (e.g. convexity).

2. **Convolution:** This applies a convolution of the input data with a bank of filters, designed to 
   capture linear temporal effects. This transformation is particularly useful when analyzing data with 
   inherent time dependencies or when the temporal dynamics of the input are significant.
    Both transformations produce a vector of features `X` that changes over time, with a shape 
    of `(n_time_points, n_features)`.

### __Non-linear Mapping__

<figure class="custom-figure">
    <img src="../assets/glm_features_scheme.svg" width="100%">
    <figcaption><strong>Figure 1:</strong> Basis as non-linear mappings. The figure demonstrate the use of basis functions to create complex non-linear features for a GLM.</figcaption>
</figure>

Non-linear mapping is the default mode of operation of any `basis` object. To instantiate a basis for non-linear mapping, 

> you need to specify the number of basis functions. In some cases, additional arguments specific to the type of 
> basis may be required (see the [API Guide](../reference/nemos/basis) for detailed information).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you need to specify the number of basis functions. For some `basis` objects, additional arguments may be required (see the [API Guide](../reference/nemos/basis) for detailed information).
```

`(n_samples, n_basis_funcs)` or `(n_samples, n_basis_funcs * n_signals)` respectively.

!!! warning "Signal length and window size"
    The `window_size` must be shorter than the number of samples in the signal(s) being convolved.

```python

>>> import numpy as np

>>> x = np.ones(500)

>>> # convolve a single signal
>>> X = basis.compute_features(x)
>>> X.shape
(500, 10)

>>> x_multi = np.ones((500, 3))

>>> # convolve a multiple signals
>>> X_multi = basis.compute_features(x_multi)
>>> X_multi.shape
(500, 30)

```

For additional information on one-dimensional convolutions, see [here](../generated/background/plot_03_1D_convolution).

## __Continuous Observations__

By default, NeMoS' GLM uses [Poisson observations](../reference/nemos/observation_models/#nemos.observation_models.PoissonObservations), which are a natural choice for spike counts. However, the package also supports a [Gamma](../reference/nemos/observation_models/#nemos.observation_models.GammaObservations) GLM, which is more appropriate for modeling continuous, non-negative observations such as calcium transients.

> To change the default observation model, follow the example below,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To change the default observation model, set the `observation_model` argument during initialization:
```

```python

>>> import nemos as nmo

>>> # set up a Gamma GLM for modeling continuous non-negative data
>>> glm = nmo.glm.GLM(observation_model=nmo.observation_models.GammaObservations())

```

Take a look at our [tutorial](../generated/tutorials/plot_06_calcium_imaging) for a detailed example.

## __Regularization__

NeMoS supports various regularization schemes, including [Ridge](../reference/nemos/regularizer/#nemos.regularizer.Ridge) ($L_2$), [Lasso](../reference/nemos/regularizer/#nemos.regularizer.Lasso) ($L_1$), and [Group Lasso](../reference/nemos/regularizer/#nemos.regularizer.GroupLasso), to prevent overfitting and improve model generalization.

> You can specify the regularization scheme and its strength when initializing the GLM model, as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify the regularization scheme and its strength when initializing the GLM model:
```

pre-processing steps in a robust and efficient manner. This includes bin-averaging, counting, convolving, smoothing and many
others. All these operations can be easily concatenated for a quick and easy data pre-processing.

In NeMoS, if a transformation  preserve the time axis and you use a `pynapple` time series as input, the result will
also be a `pynapple` time series.

A canonical example of this behavior is the `predict` method of `GLM`.

```python

>>> import numpy as np
>>> import pynapple as nap

>>> # create a TsdFrame with the features and a Tsd with the counts
>>> X = nap.TsdFrame(t=np.arange(100), d=np.random.normal(size=(100, 2)))
>>> y = nap.Tsd(t=np.arange(100), d=np.random.poisson(size=(100, )))

>>> print(type(X))  # shape (num samples, num features)
<class 'pynapple.core.time_series.TsdFrame'>

>>> model = model.fit(X, y)  # the following works

>>> firing_rate = model.predict(X)  # predict the firing rate of the neuron

>>>  # this will still be a pynapple time series
>>> print(type(firing_rate))  # shape (num_samples, )
<class 'pynapple.core.time_series.Tsd'>

```

> Let's see how you can greatly streamline your analysis pipeline by integrating `pynapple` and NeMoS.

Reviewer: do we want to include this whole example? or just link to the full example in the docs?

I think, regardless, we should link to the example for more details

Author: I would live this, since it shows really how good the tools work together.

>>> # load spikes and head direction
>>> spikes = data["units"]
>>> head_dir = data["ry"]

>>> # restrict and bin
>>> counts = spikes[6].count(0.01, ep=head_dir.time_support)

>>> # down-sample head direction
>>> upsampled_head_dir = head_dir.bin_average(0.01)  

>>> # create your features
>>> X = nmo.basis.CyclicBSplineBasis(10).compute_features(upsampled_head_dir)

>>> # add a neuron axis and fit model
>>> model = nmo.glm.GLM().fit(X, counts) 

```

Finally, let's compare the tuning curves

```python

>>> import numpy as np
>>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

>>> # tuning curves
>>> raw_tuning = nap.compute_1d_tuning_curves(spikes, head_dir, nb_bins=100)[6]

>>> # model based tuning curve
>>> model_tuning = nap.compute_1d_tuning_curves_continuous(
...     model.predict(X)[:, np.newaxis] * X.rate,  # scale by the sampling rate
...     head_dir,
...     nb_bins=100
...  )[0]

>>> # plot results
>>> sub = plt.subplot(111, projection="polar")
>>> plt1 = plt.plot(raw_tuning.index, raw_tuning.values, label="raw")
>>> plt2 = plt.plot(model_tuning.index, model_tuning.values, label="glm")
>>> legend = plt.yticks([])
>>> xlab = plt.xlabel("heading angle")

```

> <img src="../head_dir_tuning.jpg" width="40%">

Reviewer: we can't generate this image as part of the docs build?

Author: this won't run without any extra machinery, only gallery ".py" files are run.

> ## __Compatibility with `scikit-learn`__

Reviewer: link to scikit learn

`scikit-learn` is a machine learning toolkit that offers advanced features like pipelines and cross-validation methods. 
NeMoS takes advantage of these features, while still gaining the benefit of JAX's just-in-time compilation and GPU-acceleration!

> For example, if we would like to tune the critical hyper-parameter `regularizer_strength`, we  could easily run a `K-Fold` cross-validation using `scikit-learn`.

Reviewer: link to somewhere (probably scikit learn docs) for more info on cross-validation? this doesn't tell someone what cross-validation is

Reviewer: should also probably have a brief description of what and why cross-validation here

Author: I agree for what it concerns the link and pointing to additional refs (we have already a link to our own tutorial on cv and pipelining, but adding extra refs is a good idea). 

For the second point, I disagree, I would avoid an extra explanation here;

I think the quickstart should be streamlined, how to guide style to speak in diataxis terms, while  the k-fold explenation would belongs in a background type of page.

```python

>>> # set up the model
>>> import nemos as nmo
>>> import numpy as np

>>> # generate data
>>> X, counts = np.random.normal(size=(100, 3)), np.random.poisson(size=100)

>>> # model definition
>>> model = nmo.glm.GLM(regularizer="Ridge")

```

Fit a 5-fold cross-validation scheme for comparing two different regularizer strengths:

```python

>>> from sklearn.model_selection import GridSearchCV

>>> # define the parameter grid
>>> param_grid = dict(regularizer_strength=(0.01, 0.001))

>>> # define the 5-fold cross-validation grid search from sklearn
>>> cls = GridSearchCV(model, param_grid=param_grid, cv=5)

>>> # run the 5-fold cross-validation grid search
>>> cls = cls.fit(X, counts)

```

!!! info "Cross-Validation"

    For more information and a practical example on how to construct a parameter grid and cross-validate hyperparameters across an entire pipeline, please refer to the [tutorial on pipelining and cross-validation](../generated/how_to_guide/plot_06_sklearn_pipeline_cv_demo).

> Finally we can print the model coefficients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we can print the regularizer strength with the best cross-validated performance:
```

  - navigation
---

At its core, NeMoS consists of two primary modules: the `basis` and the `glm` module.

The `basis` module focuses on designing model features (inputs) for the GLM. It includes a suite of composable feature 
constructors that accept time-series data as inputs. These inputs can be any observed variables, such as presented 
stimuli, head direction, position, or spike counts. 

The basis objects can perform two types of transformations on the inputs:

> 1. **Non-linear Mapping:** This process transforms the input data through a non-linear function, 

Author: the tutorial on place cells is probably the best example of this

   allowing it to capture complex, non-linear relationships between inputs and neuronal firing rates. 
   Importantly, this transformation preserves the properties that makes GLM easy to fit and guarantee a 
   single optimal solution (e.g. convexity).

2. **Convolution:** This applies a convolution of the input data with a bank of filters, designed to 
   capture linear temporal effects. This transformation is particularly useful when analyzing data with 
   inherent time dependencies or when the temporal dynamics of the input are significant.

Both transformations produce a vector of features `X` that changes over time, with a shape 
of `(n_time_points, n_features)`.

On the other hand, the `glm` module maps the feature to spike counts. It is used to learn the GLM weights, 
evaluating the model performance, and explore its behavior on new input.

### Model Fitting

Here's a brief demonstration of how the `basis` and `glm` modules work together within NeMoS.

#### Poisson GLM for features analysis

<img src="../assets/glm_features_scheme.svg" width="100%">

In this example, we'll construct a time-series of features using the basis objects.

> 

Author: I added a note in an admonition

The figure above show the GLM scheme for a single neuron, however in NeMoS you can fit jointly the whole population with the [`PopulationGLM`](generated/how_to_guide/plot_04_population_glm.md) object.

##### Feature Representation

```python
# assume that the population spike counts time-series is stored 
# in a 2D array spike_counts of shape (n_samples, n_neurons).
spike_counts = np.random.poisson(size=(1000, 3))  

# generate 5 basis functions of 100 time-bins, 
# and convolve the counts with the basis.
X = nmo.basis.RaisedCosineBasisLog(5, mode="conv", window_size=100
    ).compute_features(spike_counts)
```

!!! note "Multi-epoch convolution"
    If your data (`spike_counts` in this example) is formatted as a `pynapple` time-series, the convolution performed by the basis objects will be 
    executed epoch-by-epoch, avoiding the risk of introducing artifacts from gaps in your time-series. See [below](#pre-processing-with-pynapple).

##### Population GLM

```python
# fit a GLM to the first neuron counts time-series
glm = nmo.glm.PopulationGLM().fit(X, spike_counts)

# compute the rate
firing_rate = glm.predict(X)

# compute log-likelihood
ll = glm.score(X, spike_counts)
```

> ### Model Arguments

Reviewer 2: I would stop here the Quickstart maybe. To me this is more part of the API.

  - navigation
---

> At his core, NeMoS consists of two primary modules: the `basis` and the `glm` module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At its core, NeMoS consists of two primary modules: the `basis` and the `glm` module.
```

The basis objects can perform two types of transformations on the inputs:

1. **Non-linear Mapping:** This process transforms the input data through a non-linear function, 
   allowing it to capture complex, non-linear relationships between inputs and neuronal firing rates. 
   Importantly, this transformation preserves the properties that makes GLM easy to fit and guarantee a 
   single optimal solution (e.g. convexity).

2. **Convolution:** This applies a convolution of the input data with a bank of filters, designed to 
   capture linear temporal effects. This transformation is particularly useful when analyzing data with 
   inherent time dependencies or when the temporal dynamics of the input are significant.

Both transformations produce a vector of features `X` that changes over time, with a shape 
of `(n_time_points, n_features)`.

On the other hand, the `glm` module maps the feature to spike counts. It is used to learn the GLM weights, 
evaluating the model performance, and explore its behavior on new input.

### Model Fitting

Here's a brief demonstration of how the `basis` and `glm` modules work together within NeMoS.

#### Poisson GLM for features analysis

> <img src="../assets/glm_features_scheme.svg" width="100%">

Reviewer: for this image, I'm assuming the "r.v." in "Poisson r.v." stands for "random variable"? I think we have the space to write that out

Author: I added a legend because it did not fit the spacing nicely otherwise

> In this example, we'll construct a time-series of features using the basis objects, applying a non-linear mapping
> (default behavior):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we'll construct a time-series of features using the basis objects.
```

If you accept my suggestion about removing the bit about non-linear mapping vs. convolutoin

###### Feature Representation

```python
import nemos as nmo
import numpy as np

# define 3 input features of shape (n_samples, )
input_1, input_2, input_3 = 0.2 * np.random.normal(size=(3, 100))

# Instantiate the basis
basis_1 = nmo.basis.MSplineBasis(n_basis_funcs=5)
basis_2 = nmo.basis.CyclicBSplineBasis(n_basis_funcs=6)
basis_3 = nmo.basis.MSplineBasis(n_basis_funcs=7)

basis = basis_1 * basis_2 + basis_3

# Generate the design matrix starting from some raw 
# input time series, i.e. LFP phase, position, etc.
X = basis.compute_features(input_1, input_2, input_3)
```

###### Simulate Spike Counts

> Let's generate some spikes from a Poisson model.

Reviewer: should point out that most users won't do this -- they'll be getting this data from their experiment.

makes me wonder if we should show this with simulated data (vs. loading in a small example dataset)

Author: for a quickstart I think it is fine to use fake data. I would not use an example data here because explaining it takes more time than actually drawing some samples. 
What we should aim for is executable code,  the input is not relevant, so I would not go into the load some data route.

Author: I removed the section and added a simulation of the counts in the code; this should give less emphasis to this step

# initialize a Gamma GLM with Ridge regularization
model = nmo.glm.GLM(
    regularizer="Ridge", 
    observation_model=nmo.observation_models.GammaObservations()
)
```

> ### Pre-processing with `pynapple`

Reviewer 2: ... and I would keep the remaining in the Quickstart but maybe with an extra title like "Compatibility with other packages". But not sure. This could be a page on its own but not sure where it would fit.
